Aligning Simulation Models:
A Case Study and Results

by

Robert Axtell, The Brookings Institution
Robert Axelrod, The University of Michigan*
Joshua M. Epstein, The Brookings Institution
and Michael D. Cohen, The University of Michigan

September 1, 1995

Published in Computational and Mathematical Organization
Theory,1 (1996), pp. 123-141.

*To whom correspondence should be sent at School of Public Policy, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor MI 48109. email: axe@umich.edu. Phone 313-763-0099. Fax:
313-763-9181.

The authors gratefully acknowledge financial assistance from The Brookings
Institution, World Resources Institute, John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation,
The Santa Fe Institute, The Program for the Study of Complex Systems, and the LS&A
Enrichment Fund of the University of Michigan, and the U.S. Advanced Research
Projects Administration.

Abstract
This paper develops the concepts and methods of a process we will call
"alignment of computational models" or "docking" for short. Alignment is needed to
determine whether two models can produce the same results, which in turn is the basis for
critical experiments and for tests of whether one model can subsume another. We
illustrate our concepts and methods using as a target a model of cultural transmission built
by Axelrod. For comparison we use the Sugarscape model developed by Epstein and
Axtell.
The two models differ in many ways and, to date, have been employed with quite
different aims. The Axelrod model has been used principally for intensive experimentation
with parameter variation, and includes only one mechanism. In contrast, the Sugarscape
model has been used primarily to generate rich "artificial histories", scenarios that display
stylized facts of interest, such as cultural differentiation driven by many different
mechansims including resource availability, migration, trade, and combat.
The Sugarscape model was modified so as to reproduce the results of the Axelrod
cultural model. Among the questions we address are: what does it mean for two models
to be equivalent, how can different standards of equivalence be statistically evaluated, and
how do subtle differences in model design affect the results? After attaining a "docking"
of the two models, the richer set of mechanisms of the Sugarscape model is used to
provide two experiments in sensitivity analysis for the cultural rule of Axelrod's model.
Our generally positive experience in this enterprise has suggested that it could be
beneficial if alignment and equivalence testing were more widely practiced among
computational modellers.

1. Introduction

1.1 Motivation
If computational modeling is to become a widely used tool in social science
research, it is our belief that a process we will call "alignment of computational models"
will be an essential activity. Without such a process of close comparison, computational
modeling will never provide the clear sense of "domain of validity" that typically can be
obtained for mathematized theories. It seems fundamental to us to be able to determine
whether two models claiming to deal with the same phenomena can, or cannot, produce
the same results.
Alignment is essential to support two hallmarks of cumulative disciplinary
research: critical experiment and subsumption. If we cannot determine whether or not two
models produce equivalent results in equivalent conditions, we cannot reject one model in
favor of another that fits data better; nor are we able to say that one model is a special
case of another more general one -- as we do when saying Einstein's treatment of gravity
subsumes Newton's.
Although it seems clear that there should be frequent efforts to show pairs of
computer models to be equivalent, we are aware of only one such case (Anderson and
FIscher, 1986), and we know of no systematic analysis of the issues raised in trying to
establish equivalence.
We have identified a few cases in which an older model has been reprogrammed in
a new language, sometimes with extensions, by a later author. For example, Michael

Prietula has reported 1 reimplementing a model from Cyert and March (1963) and Ray
Levitt has reported a reimplementation of Cohen, March and Olsen (1972). 2 However,
these procedures are not comparisons of different models that bear on the same
phenomena. Rather they are "reimplementations", where a later model is programmed
from the outset to reproduce as closely as possible the behavior of an earlier model. Our
interest is in the more general and troublesome case in which two models incorporating
distinctive mechanisms bear on the same class of social phenomena, be it voting behavior,
attitude formation, or organizational centralization.
This paper therefore aims to achieve two goals: 1) to report a novel set of results
from aligning two different computer models of cultural transmission; and 2) to report an
informative case study of the process used to obtain these novel results.

1.2 Overview
The paper is organized into six sections. After this brief introductory section,
Section 2 provides more detailed background on the two models necessary for
understanding the results. The third section reports our procedures in aligning the two
models and in collecting information for this case report. The fourth contains results from
two comparison experiments. The fifth reports our observations on the model alignment
process. The conclusion is the sixth section.

2. Background on the Two Models

Our objective has been to determine if a set of results obtained in a model of
cultural transmission built by Robert Axelrod (1995), could also be obtained in the

1Personal communication to Michael Cohen.
2Personal communication to Michael Cohen.

-2-

different setting of the Sugarscape model of Joshua M. Epstein and Robert Axtell
(1995).3 Sugarscape differs from the Axelrod model in many ways. Most notably,
culture is one of many processes that can be operative in the more general Sugarscape
system, which has model agents who -- among other things -- move, eat, reproduce, fight,
trade, and suffer disease. The Axelrod model has much simpler agents who do none of
these things, but rather occupy fixed positions on a square plane, interacting only with
their immediate neighbors to the North, South, East, and West.4
The two models are in this respect clear examples of distinctively different
approaches to computational modeling: Sugarscape is designed to study the interaction of
many different plausible social mechanisms. It is a kind of "artificial world" (Lane, 1993).
In contrast, the Axelrod Culture Model (ACM) was built to implement a single
mechanism for a single process, with the aim of carrying out extensive experiments
varying parameters of that mechanism. It much more resembles the spirit of traditional
mathematical theorizing in its commitment to extreme simplicity and complete analysis of
each model parameter.

3Axelrod's source code is approximately 1500 lines of Pascal for the Macintosh (Synamtec

THINK Pascal version 4.0.1) and is available from the author. The Sugarscape source code
is approximately 20,000 lines of Object Pascal and C for the 68K Macintosh (Symantec
THINK Pascal version 4.0.2 and THINK C version 7.0.6 compilers). Agent objects are
written in Pascal while low-level and graphics routines are primarily written in C. This code
is available from Robert Axtell. Executable versions of the code, configured with Axelrod's
culture rule and capable of generating the data in this paper, are also available from Axtell.
4Other models of cultural transmission and social influence include Renfrew (1973),

Sabloff (1981), Nowak, Szamrej and Latane (1990), Friedkin and Johnsen (1990), Putnam
(1966), March (1991), Harrison and Carol (1991), Carley (1991), and Cavalli-Sforza and
Feldman (1991). See also Axelrod (1995).
-3-

We begin by describing briefly how the Axelrod model works.5 The model studies
a square array of agents all following a single rule. The agents are cultural entities which
might be thought of as 'villages'. Each agent interacts with a fixed set of neighbors, four
unless the agent is located on an edge or corner of the square. Each agent has several
attributes and each of those attributes can take any one of several nominal-scale values.
For the work reported here we have used five attributes, each taking one of fifteen values.
The initial state of each agent is determined by randomizing the value of each attribute.
Attributes might be interpreted as forms of dress, linguistic patterns, religious practices,
or other culturally determined features.
The central aim of the ACM is to study the effects of a simple mechanism of
cultural transmission that operates as follows. An agent is selected at random to be the
next one active. One of the four neighbors is selected to be that agent's next contact. An
attribute is selected among the five. If the two agents have the same value for that
attribute, another attribute on which they differ is selected at random, if there are any, and
the active agent assumes the value for that attribute currently held by the contacted
neighbor. Activity is allowed to continue until every agent differs from each of its
neighbors either at every attribute or at none. At this point no further change is possible
and the model run stops.
A key feature of this cultural change mechanism is that cultural change becomes
more likely as two neighbors are more alike, and less likely as they differ. A central
question of interest in the work with the model is whether this variability of interaction
rate is itself sufficient to create stable diversity rather than eventual homogeneity -- as one
would expect with a model that allowed unlike neighbors to continue interacting no matter
how different they were.

5A complete account of the model structure and of results obtained from experiments can

be found in Axelrod (1995).
-4-

While the ACM can be conveyed in a few paragraphs, and its results can be fully
described in a short article, Sugarscape is a much more complex system that can be
rendered fully only at book length (Epstein and Axtell, 1995). This is not because
individual mechanisms of Sugarscape are complex. On the contrary, each of its
mechanisms are of about the same complexity as in the Axelrod model. However, the
intent of Sugarscape is to investigate the interplay of many mechanisms as they operate
simultaneously -- as happens in actual social life. In particular, Sugarscape is intended as a
tool in sufficiency testing of social theories, allowing theorists to ask if a stipulated set of
mechanisms and conditions (say for a market to "clear") actually will produce the
predicted phenomenon.
Sugarscape therefore has processes that allow its agents to look for, move to, and
eat a resource ("sugar") which grows on its toroidal array of cells. Thus while food
growing cells are immobile, active agents are purposively mobile, and this is one of many
fundamental differences with the Axelrod model.
Sugarscape agents also have cultural attributes. In typical studies with the model
there are eleven cultural attributes, each of which takes one of two values. Cultural
attributes change in Sugarscape as part of a larger cycle of agent activity.
In this model, the agents also become active in random order.6 Each agent, when
active, engages in a number of processes. For the present discussion, the most important
of these is moving to a cell within its vision range that is richest in sugar. At that location
an agent interacts culturally with all its neighbors. (Sugarscape agents typically do not
populate all the landscape cells, so the active agent may have fewer than four other agents
in its neighborhood.) In a cultural interaction, an attribute is selected at random, and if the
neighbor differs from the agent the value is changed to that of the agent.

6The method is similar, but not identical, to that in ACM, as discussed below.

-5-

In Sugarscape, attributes are aggregated (typically by a simple majority rule) and
this determines an agent's cultural type, usually labeled as either "Red" or "Blue". Cultural
type then enters into many other processes in which Sugarscape agents may engage, such
as trade, combat, and sexual reproduction.
Whereas the Axelrod model was designed principally for intensive
experimentation with parameter variation, the intended use of the Sugarscape model is
quite different in design. In it agents have many behavioral rules in addition to cultural
ones, and while the model may be used for exploration of parameter spaces, it has
heretofore been primarily used to generate "artificial histories", scenarios that display
stylized facts of interest, such as cultural differentiation driven by resource availability, or
recognizable patterns of migration, trade, and combat. The principal use of the generated
scenarios is for sufficiency tests, showing that the implemented individual-level
mechanisms are able to produce the collective-level phenomena of interest.
It should be apparent that the two models are vastly different in many important
respects. Nonetheless, they have two central features in common that suggest that they
could be meaningfully compared. The first is that both are "agent-based" models. They
work by specifying properties of individual actors in the system and then studying the
collective phenomena that result as those individuals interact --in this case in local
neighborhoods of two-dimensional space. The second shared feature is that both
represent cultural attributes of individual agents as strings of symbols and model cultural
diffusion as a convergence process between neighbors.

3. Procedures of Our Comparison

These two strong similarities suggested to Axelrod and Cohen, as they read a draft
account of the Sugarscape project, that it might be possible to "dock" the two models -- in
analogy to orbital docking of dissimilar spacecraft. Thus it could be determined whether

-6-

Sugarscape, under suitable conditions, would produce results equivalent to those already
obtained for the ACM. Epstein and Axtell were contacted. They agreed such a test
would be instructive. All four investigators believe that alignment of models will be
necessary if computational modeling is to become a significant medium of theoretical
expression. that Equivalence testing could make an important contributtion in the social
sciences, though it would not replace external validity assessment.7 None of the four
could think of a case where such an equivalence test had been reported, or where the
problem of equivalence testing hadbeen analyzed in detail.8

3.1 Making the Comparison and Preparing the Case Report
The four investigators agreed on procedures for conducting the test, and for
keeping records of the work done and problems encountered in the course of the testing.
The aims were: 1) to determine if equivalent results were produced in equivalent
conditions; 2) to demonstrate the effects of relaxing some of the equivalent conditions;
and 3) to be able to report problems that occurred and their resolutions, thus taking first
steps in establishing the practice of equivalence testing more generally in social science
computational modeling.
The procedures followed were roughly analogous to those used when a second
investigator in a laboratory science is attempting to reproduce results obtained in a first
investigator's laboratory (Latour and Woolgar , 1979).
Epstein and Axtell worked with a pre-publication draft account of the ACM to do
their preliminary work. They considered what steps they would have to take in order to

7On external validation see Dutton and Starbuck (1971), Knepell and Arangno (1993) and

Burton and Obel (1995).
8Subsequent search did uncover one such report: Anderson and Fischer (1986).

no systematic treatment of the conceptual issues has been found.
-7-

Thus far

reproduce the key results identified by Axelrod. These results show how the number of
culturally identical regions that exist when stability is reached varies as a function of three
parameters: the number of attributes, the number of values per attribute, and the size of
the square lattice. These results included the most surprising aspect of ACM's
performance: that the equilibrium number of cultural "regions" produced by the model
first increases, then decreases as a function of the number of agents.9
Axtell and Epstein then visited Axelrod and Cohen at the University of Michigan,
where a conference clarified ambiguities. Further changes were to be made to Sugarscape,
and then preliminary equivalence tests run. A fuller set of tests was run and analyzed
when Epstein and Axtell returned to their work site at the Brookings Institution. Epstein
and Axtell then continued by relaxing some of the factors that had been made equivalent
to those of ACM, in order to see what differences such changes would make.

3.2 Testing Model Equivalence
A central issue was the determination of how to assess "equivalence" of the two
models. The plan required an effort to show that the Sugarscape model could behave
comparably to the ACM, and this entails a standard by which to assess "equivalence" of
measures made on the two models. This was discussed on the telephone and via email at
an early stage. The conclusion was that for this case it would suffice if Sugarscape could
be shown --when using a basic cultural transmission mechanism similar to the ACM's -to produce several distributions of measurements that were statistically indistinguishable
from distributions produced by the ACM.
The four investigators agreed that this is a rather tight standard, since one might
argue that Sugarscape was equivalent if it produced a set of results with the same ordinal
patterns as those from the ACM. But a demanding test was felt to be appropriate since

9Axelrod defined a cultural region as a set of a contiguous sites with identical culture.

-8-

this was a first exercise of its kind, and since programming changes to Sugarscape could
make its basic cultural transmission mechanism algorithmically equivalent to that in
ACM. All the authors agreed that "equivalence" of models with stochastic elements must
be defined in context, and further observations on this central and thorny issue are offered
in the final section. In particular, we expand there on the difficult problem of giving a
precise statistical content to the concept "statistically indistinguishable distributions."

4. Results From the Two Experiments

We turn now to reporting our observations on the behavior of Sugarscape in
comparison with that of ACM. We describe the changes made to Sugarscape in order to
bring it into alignment with what were judged to be principal features determining ACM's
results.

4.1 Changes Made to Dock Sugarscape with ACM
Vision range was reduced to the immediate four neighbors. Movement range was
reduced to zero. The usual initialization of Sugarscape to a population sparsely
distributed over its array of cells was altered to a distribution placing an agent on every
cell. The toroidal topology of Sugarscape was altered to a bounded square. There was
actually a discrepancy introduced in doing this, which we comment on below. The
constant numbers of attributes and values per attribute in Sugarscape were made into
variables that could be set to the three different levels used in the ACM runs shown in
our Table 1.
One difference was deemed small and not eliminated. Sugarscape activates agents
one at a time from a random permutation of the list of agents. When the list is finished, it
is repermuted and activation begins again. Axelrod, as mentioned, activates a new
randomly chosen agent every time. Roughly the methods correspond to sampling agents

-9-

for activation without and with replacement. Thus for any given set of n agents, in
Sugarscape a block of n activations will make each agent active exactly once, while in the
Axelrod model most would be active once, but a few might be active either zero times or
two or more times. Our decision not to eliminate this difference, small though it seemed,
did have interesting consequences which we describe below.
We had decided that to reproduce Axelrod's results Epstein and Axtell should first
try using exactly his rules for determining cultural change. They therefore programmed a
substitute for their own cultural change rule, which took no account of inter-agent
similarity in the diffusion of culture attributes among interacting neighbors, and which
caused each agent to interact culturally with all its neighbors.

4.2 Sugarscape Reproduces Central Results of Axelrod's Culture Model
Table 1a, with target data from Axelrod (1995), gives the number of stable cultural
regions for a 10 x 10 lattice, averaged over ten runs, as a function of the number of cultural
attributes and the values per attribute. Note that, other things being equal, the number of
cultural regions present in equilibrium increases with the number of traits per feature and
decreases with the number of cultural features. Of the 9 tabulated values, only four are
not equal to 1.0.
A directly analogous display, Table 1b, has been generated with the Sugarscape
implementation of the Axelrod cultural rule. The qualitative dependence of the number of
stable cultural regions on the number of features and traits per feature is the same as in
Axelrod's table. Notice that in this new table only three entries are not equal to 1.0.
-------------Table 1 here.
--------------Quantitative agreement between the two sets of data is clear for the five entries of
1.0 that the tables have in common. To test how well the remaining entries in the two

- 10 -

tables agree quantitatively, non-parametric statistical comparisons were undertaken. The
critical value of the two-sided Mann-Whitney U statistic at the 0.05 level of significance
for samples of size 10 is 23 (Siegel, 1956). That is, one rejects the null hypothesis for a
value of U at or below 23. For all comparisons between the two tables the U-statistics
are greater than the critical value and thus one cannot reject the null hypothesis on
nonparametric grounds. Overall, it seems very likely that the corresponding data in the
two tables were drawn from the same distribution.
Figure 1 gives the target data from Axelrod (1995) on the number of stable cultural
regions as a function of the lattice size for five cultural features with fifteen traits per
feature. This figure has an interesting non-monotonic shape, a result discussed at some
length by the author. Data for the 5 x 5, 10 x 10 and 20 x 20 lattices have been generated
using the Sugarscape implementation of the Axelrod cultural rule. In each case, the sample
size was 40, the same sample size used by Axelrod for these three cases. The means from
the modified Sugarscape model and corresponding error bars are also displayed on Figure
1. To determine to what extent this data agrees with Axelrod's original data, we employed
the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) test of the goodness-of-fit of empirical cumulative
distribution functions (c.f., Hoel, 1962) - a nonparametric test.10
-------------Figure 1 here.
--------------The null hypothesis is that the corresponding data points are drawn from the
same distribution. At the 5% significance level, the two-tailed critical value of the K-S
statistic with forty observations is 0.304. That is, if the actual K-S value exceeds this
critical value then the null hypotheses is rejected.

10The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was not used for the comparisons in Table 1 because it

has low power for small sample sizes.
- 11 -

For the two sets of data corresponding to the 5 x 5 lattice the K-S statistic is
0.225. Therefore the null hypothesis cannot be rejected. In the 10 x 10 case the K-S
statistic is 0.175, and so once again the null hypothesis cannot be rejected. Finally the
20x20 lattice size reveals that the K-S statistic is 0.5 > 0.304 and thus the null hypothesis
is rejected - the data for this parameter value appear likely drawn from different
distributions. The ACM mean in this case was 16.25. The modified Sugarscape mean is
9.23.
1) In what sense may the computational models still be called "equivalent"? The
modified Sugarscape model produces results that are numerically identical to those from
ACM in some cases. It produces distributions of results that cannot be distinguished
statistically from ACM distributions in eleven of the twelve comparions. In one case it
produces a distribution that can be distinguished, although the mean is in the desired
relationship to the other means. That is, the 20x20 lattice has a mean number of regions
less than the 10 x 10 case. This non-monotonicity was the important character of the
result in Axelrod's view of his own results. In our conclusion we argue that these are
three natural categories of model equivalence, which we call 'numerical identity',
'distributional equivalence', and 'relational equivalence'. We discuss implications of these
distinctions in Section 6.
2) What is the likely cause of the observed difference? Because we had brought so
many aspects of the two models into algorithmic agreement, we were surprised when this
discrepancy occurred. But not all aspects of the two models agreed, and the statistically
significant difference indicates that this mattered in the 20x20 case. We believe the
difference arises from our decision not to convert the Sugarscape activation method to the
ACM method. The Sugarscape method does not allow for the same agent to be
occasionally active several times before other agents have had their "fair" share of
influence. This additional uniformity of influence appears to be sufficient to induce

- 12 -

greater ultimate convergence in cultures.11 When we convert the activation code in
Sugarscape to the "sampling with replacement" method of ACM, 20x20 case no longer
causes a problem. And when all the cases are rerun in Sugarscape with random activation,
each one of them gives data that are indistinguishable from the ACM.12
3) What is the correct null hypothesis for statistical testing of equivalence? We
have conformed in our statistical testing to the usual logic that formulates the problem as
rejection of a null hypothesis of distributional identity. But the alert reader may have
noticed that this is not entirely satisfactory in the special circumstances of testing model
equivalence. With one exception discussed earlier, we have concluded that we cannot
reject, at conventional confidence probabilities, the null hypothesis that the distributions
are the same.
The unsatisfactory aspect of this approach is that it creates an incentive for
investigators to test equivalence with small sample sizes. The smaller sample, the higher
the threshold for rejecting the null hypothesis, and therefore the greater the chance of
establishing equivalence. We have resisted this temptation and used sample sizes typical

11A possibly related result is obtained below in Section 4.3, where it is shown that allowing

agents to mix with non-neighbors also reduces the eventual equilibrium number of cultures.
12The Sugarscape with random activation gives means and non-zero standard deviations as

follows. For table 1, reading across 1.2 ± 0.4, 4.10 ± 1.3, 18.8 ± 9.7, 1.0, 1.0, 1.9 ± 1.0,
1.0, 1.0, 1.0. The Mann-Whitney U statistics for these 9 sets of data of ten data points
each do not reject the null hypothesis that these data are drawn from the same underlying
distributions as Table 1, at the 0.05 level of significance. For Figure 1, the data are 9.8 ±
2.8 (for 5x5 case) , 20.4 ± 7.9 (for 10x10 case), and 14.8 ± 7.0 (for 20x20 case). The
Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistics for these 3 data sets of 40 points each do not reject the
hypothesis that these data have the same distributions as the corresponding distributions
from Axelrod's Culture Model shown in Figure 1.
- 13 -

of simulation studies. We feel satisfied in this case that, with the one exception noted, the
models behave equivalently. In the long run, however, we see a need to formulate a more
appropriate statistical logic.13

4.3 Sensitivity Analysis of Agent-Based Models

The literature on sensitivity analysis in agent-based models is, as yet, quite
small.14How do alterations in local rules affect emergent macroscopic structures, such as
cultural patterns? Dockings of the sort we have reported facilitate this new kind of
sensitivity analysis. Here, we conduct two experiments involving agent movement rules.

4.3.1 A Mobility Experiment
As noted earlier, "agents" in the ACM occupy fixed positions on a square lattice,
while in Sugarscape, agents are mobile. One natural question, therefore is: what happens

13Our current view of the most promising direction is to reverse the usual null hypothesis

formulation and ask whether we can confidently reject the claim that the distributions are
different. However, there are two complications in this approach. First, with stochastic
models it will be extremely hard to conclude that all the observed difference in sample
means is due to sampling fluctuation. This suggests that it will be necessary to use a null
hypothesis such as "the two distributions differ by no more than X percent", with X chosen
by convention or to be appropriate within the referent context. Second, with such a reversed
and non-simple null hypothesis, and with no solid reason to assume a convenient (e.g.
Gaussian) form of the underlying distributions, it is unlikely that there will be a manageable
analytic method of obtaining confidence levels for the statistics. This suggests that the
problem will have to attacked with computational statistical tools, such as the bootstrap
approach of Efron and Tibshirani (1993).
14For an example based on cellular automata see Wuensche and Lesser (1992).
- 14 -

to the equilibrium number of cultures in the ACM if agents are permitted to move around
the Sugarscape interacting with neighbors, with interaction governed by the ACM cultural
transmission rule? Will we see greater equilibrium cultural diversity or less? In the
ACM, there is zero probability that non-neighboring agents will directly interact, while in
Sugarscape, depending on the landscape topography, any two agents might eventually
interact directly. Since the effect of movement is therefore to "mix" the population, we
would expect that eventually there would be less diversity than without movement. This
is what we find.
In order to carry out the experiment the Sugarscape was configured as a 50 x 50
grid having a single (Gaussian) "sugar mountain" in the center. One hundred mobile agents
were given random initial locations on this landscape. Each agent engages in purposive
behavior as follows: 1) it searches locally for the lattice location having the most sugar; 2)
it moves to the nearest best site and 3) it gathers (eats) the sugar on that site. The agent
population is heterogeneous with respect to its vision, i.e., how far each agent can "see"
locally in the principal lattice directions (north, south, east and west). In these runs vision
was uniformly distributed between 5 and 10 in the agent population. After moving
agents engage in cultural exchange--here according to Axelrod's cultural exchange rule--with
one of their neighbors. One important difference between the Sugarscape and the ACM is
that agents may have anywhere from 0 to 4 neighbors on the Sugarscape while (nonboundary) agents always have exactly 4 neighbors in the ACM. Once sugar is
"harvested" by the agents it grows back at unit rate. The "termination criterion"
employed had to be modified somewhat for this run. In the case of fixed agents, cultural
transmission terminates when all neighboring agents are either completely identical or
completely different. With mobile agents it is necessary to check whether all agents are
either completely the same or completely different, independent of whether or not they
are neighbors. This "global" stopping criterion is computationally more expensive than
the "local" one appropriate for fixed agents.

- 15 -

Since we expected movement to reduce the number of cultures present it seemed
natural to test the proposition using the parameters which yielded the most cultures in
the ACM. In the case of 100 agents (10 x 10 grid) having 5 cultural features and 15
traits/feature, the ACM produced an average of 20.0 (s.d. ± 10.1) distinct cultures, while
the Sugarscape version of the ACM (fixed agents) yielded 21.3 (± 12.5). The introduction
of movement dramatically reduces the number of cultures. Over a sample of 10 runs in
Sugarscape the average was 1.1 (±0.3). When the experiment was repeated for the case of
5 features-30 traits/feature, under the expectation that this larger "cultural space" would
yield more distinct cultures in equilibrium, the average number of cultures present in
Sugarscape increased somewhat to 2.2 (±1.2).

4.3.2

A "Soup" Experiment
Movement mixes the population. The extreme form of this is the so-called

"soup", in which agents are paired at random regardless of location, and then interact
under the ACM rule. Since this results in more thorough mixing than movement, we
would expect the "culturally homogenizing" effect to be even stronger. And it was.
For 100 agents having 5 cultural features and 15 traits/feature, in 10 runs there was
never a case in which more than 1 culture remained. When the number of traits/feature
was increased to 30, a sequence of 10 runs yielded 7 runs which ended up with a single
culture, 2 instances of 2 distinct cultures and a single case of 3 equilibrium cultures; an
average of 1.4 overall. Essentially, most of the ACM's cultural diversity disappears in
soup.
In summary, the more well-mixed the society, the lower is the equilibrium number of
distinct cultures. Relatedly, multi-cultural equilibria in the ACM require that the
probability of interaction between completely different agents be literally zero. If there is
any probability of interaction (or if there is any point mutation rate) the long-run

- 16 -

attractor is one culture. The above points concern the number of equilibria only; can we
say anything about the rates at which these set in?
Recall the basic dynamic of the ACM: the greater the similarity between
neighboring agents, the more rapidly does their similarity grow. Once similarity reaches a
certain state, convergence is rapid--almost as if a phase transition occurs. Now, the
counterintuitive result is that the more well-mixed the society, the later is this "phase
transition." In the ACM model local clusters of neighboring agents develop similarities.
Their high spatial correlation permits these agents to arrive at "agreement" very quickly,
while in the Sugarscape mobility case, agents "hop away" before agreement is possible;
and in the extreme soup, where spatial correlation is zero, the "phase change" is later still.
In summary, the lower the spatial correlation the later is the onset of rapid convergence to
equilibrium, and the lower is the equilibrium number of cultures.

5. Results on the Docking Process Itself

5.1 The Docking Process
When Epstein and Axtell visited the University of Michigan they brought their
model with them on a portable computer. A portion of the work needed for the
equivalence testing was done prior to their arrival. This encompassed most of the changes
described in Section 4.1.
Fortunately, Sugarscape was programmed in Object Pascal and with considerable
attention to generality. It was therefore possible to make most of these changes as
substitutions of parameter values or by "throwing switches".
On their arrival in Ann Arbor, a meeting was held to resolve several ambiguities
that remained on the basis of reading Axelrod's text. We note an implication of this: under
current standards of reporting a simulation model it will often not be possible to resolve
all questions for an alignment exercise. Thus it will be necessary either to contact the

- 17 -

author of the target model, to have access to the source code, or to have access to a
documentation of the target model more complete than is generally provided in accounts
published in contemporary journals.
The meeting also determined what steps were to be taken next. Axtell spent an
evening doing additional programming. The next day it was possible to run a number of
cases that would be needed to build a Sugarscape version of the Axelrod results.
Two months later while preparing to write up the results, Axtell realized that
another change was necessary for the docking. Whereas the ACM altered the active agent
when a cultural borrowing happened, the original Sugarscape model altered the agent's
neighbor. This made a subtle difference because agents on the edge of the territory have
fewer neighbors than those in the interior. To be sure that every site had the same chance
to change, the ACM method is needed. When this was realized, Axtell made the
necessary change to the Sugarscape implementation, and generated the data shown in
Table 1 and Figure 1.

5.2 Total Time Required
The various tasks entailed in this docking exercise and the experimental extensions
of the ACM are listed in the Appendices. These two appendices provide a description of
the specific tasks undertaken by Axelrod and Axtell respectively, along with the times
required for each. All told, the work took about 23 hours for Axelrod and 37 hours for
Axtell.15

5.3 Factors Making This Case Relatively Easy

15These numbers do not include the time spent by all four participants in writing this report.

- 18 -

There are at least four factors that can be identified as contributing to the relative
ease with which the equivalence test was accomplished. First, the Sugarscape program
was written from the outset with the objective of maximizing generality and ease of
change. These goals are not especially easy to attain in practice, but object-oriented
programming certainly did help.16
A second positive contributing factor is the extreme simplicity of the Axelrod
model. This allowed the prose description to be essentially complete, and had ACM
contained as many processes as Sugarscape it would have been considerably more
difficult to bring the two so fully into alignment.
A third factor, was the recency of the ACM project. The statistical comparison
required the full 210 points underlying the results reported in the original article.17 These
were relatively easy for the original investigator to provide, and this might not be so in
other cases.
A fourth factor, already mentioned briefly, is the underlying agreement of the two
models on a basic, "agent-oriented" framework. In the absence of that, the architectures
of the two models might have been so different as to make the project inconceivable.

5.4 Factors Making This Case Relatively Hard
On the other side of the ledger, there are several factors in the situation of this case
study that probably made the exercise more difficult than future cases might be.
Foremost among these is the probability that in the future models may be built with a

16It should also be said that Axtell, the lead programmer on Sugarscape, is a relatively

skilled practitioner. He does not have experience producing commercial quality code, but
his training did include doctoral level course work in computer science.
17There were 10 runs for each of the 9 cases in Table 1, and 40 runs from each of the 3

cases used for comparison from Figure 1.
- 19 -

prospect of equivalence testing clearly in view. ACM did not exist when Sugarscape was
designed. Thus demonstrating equivalence to the ACM was not among its design
specifications. If it had been, the equivalence testing could have been simpler still.
Also, one can plausibly imagine that there may someday be a number of more
standardized code modules available which are reused in successive modeling projects.
Random number generators meet this criterion today, and more substantive model
elements may do so in the future. This too could substantially decrease costs of
equivalence testing.
Overall, we would say that we did not find it completely straightforward to align
the two models. But we were able to accomplish it in the end. And while the difficulties
we encountered in reconciling them may seem disquieting, we should recall that they are
not without precedent. Differential and integral calculus produced different results in the
hands of different investigators until the foundations were solidified in the 19th century
by the work of Cauchy and Weierstrass (Kramer, 1970). And what is the alternative to
confronting these difficulties, to look away and rest our theorizing on unverified
assumptions of equivalence?

6. Observations on the Value and Difficulties of Alignment

We conclude with some further observation on three matters: whether the face-toface meeting we used in this alignment effort is likely to be typical; how we might label
different approaches to defining "equivalence" ; and a brief proposal for the use of
equivalence tests in evaluations made of journal submissions and research funding
proposals.
There is one point at which the process we report might not be typical of
alignments that would be done in the future, if this kind of analysis were to become more
common. It is that a meeting, such as Epstein and Axtell had with Axelrod, might not be

- 20 -

necessary in general. The meeting that was held served two functions: establishing details
about the procedure of alignment and clarifying ambiguous aspects of the ACM. If the
situation were one of comparison to a published model situated in an established line of
research the former issues might be decided entirely by the author of a new model who
seeks to establish its equivalence to an older one. This situation is one that we imagine
might become more usual.
The second function of the meeting, resolving ambiguities about the construction
of the target model, is not one that we imagine as likely to go away. On the contrary,
many target models will be considerably more complex than the ACM. However, it may
also be true that those attempting to show a new model equivalent to an old one will have
source code for the old one -- a resource which was deliberately not employed in this
case. It may also be true that the criteria of equivalence may be looser than they were in
this case, a point we discuss below.
Considering all these factors, our impression is that good alignments can be made
without actual meetings of model authors. This will be all the more likely if authors who
report their models begin to assume that alignments may later be tried and thus become
careful about providing information that may be essential to such efforts. We emphasize
that 1) a precise, detailed statement of how the model works is critical, and 2) that
distributional information about reported measurements is necessary if statistical methods
to test equivalence are to be employed by a later investigator.
As we noted above, the problem of specifying what will taken as "equivalent"
model behavior is by no means trivial. Our reflections on it suggest that there are at least
two categories of equivalence beyond the obvious criterion of numerical identity, which
will not be expected in any models that have stochastic elements. We call these two
categories "distributional" and "relational" equivalence. By distributional equivalence we
mean a showing that two models produce distributions of results that cannot be
distinguished statistically. This is the level of equivalence we eventually chose to test for

- 21 -

in our case. By "relational equivalence" we mean that the two models can be shown to
produce the same internal relationship among their results. For example, both models
might show a particular variable is a quadratic function of time, or that some measure on a
population decreases monotonically with population size.
Clearly, relational equivalence will generally be a "weaker", less demanding, test.
But for many theoretical purposes it may suffice. And distributional equivalence may
sometimes be possible only with alignment of parametric details of the two models that
would be quite laborious to achieve.
Finally, our generally positive experience in this enterprise has suggested to us
that it could be beneficial if alignment and equivalence testing were more widely practiced
among computational modellers. It can be done within the reasonable effort level of a few
days or weeks work -- possibly less if it is planned for from the outset. And the
consequences are quite large. The Sugarscape group can now say with confidence that
their model can be modified to reproduce the ACM results, and they point to specific
mechanisms of Sugarscape which are sufficient to change the effect of the ACM
transmission mechanism. This begins to build confidence that other results with
Sugarscape may be robust over potential variation in the specifics of its cultural
transmission process.
Readers of papers on Sugarscape and the ACM can now have a clearer conception
of how they related to each other. And future modellers of cultural transmission will have
a clearer understanding the likely consequences of different transmission mechanisms. In
short, the interested community obtains from such an exercise an improved sense of the
robustness, the range of plausibility, of model results. And points of difference have been
established which could allow empirical evidence to discriminate between the models.
These are major hallmarks of cumulative disciplinary theorizing that are unavailable
without alignment of models.

- 22 -

We are led to the suggestion that it might be valuable if authors of computational
models knew they would receive credit for having made such alignments. If reviewers of
journal and research grant submissions were encouraged to give substantial positive
weight to such demonstrations, and authors knew of this policy, the effects could be
dramatic. Among other things, this would create an incentive to establish a model in an
area of inquiry that could readily serve as a "benchmark" for comparisons by later models.
The result might well be more -- and more extensive -- families of computational models
displaying an explicit and clear network of relations to each other. This would be an
important gain over the current situation in which, with a small number of exceptions,
each model has been constructed entirely de novo.
Computational modeling offers a striking opportunity to fashion miniature
worlds, and this appeals to powerful creative impulses within all of us. William Blake
expressed this deep need writing in his Jerusalem (1804/1974, pl.10, 1.20).
"I must Create a System, or be enslav'd by another Man's; I will not
Reason and Compare: my business is to Create."
But if these wonderful new possibilities of computational modeling are to become
intellectual tools well-harnessed to the requirements of advancing our understanding of
social systems, then we must overcome the natural impulse for self-contained creation
and carefully develop the methodology of using them to "Reason and Compare".

- 23 -

References

Anderson, Paul A. and Gregory W. Fischer. 1985, "A Monte Carlo Model of a Garbage
Can Decision Process" in James March and Roger Weissinger-Baylon (eds.),
Ambiguity and Command: Organizational Perspective on Military Decision
Making. Pitman Publishing, Inc.: Marshfield, MA.
Axelrod, R. (1995), "The Convergence and Stability of Cultures: Local Convergence and
Global Polarization," Santa Fe Institute working paper 95-03-028.
Blake, W. (1804/1974). Jerusalem, the Emanation of the Giant Albion. B. Quarich:
London.
Burton, R. M. and B. Obel (1995), "The Validity of Computational Models in
Organization Science: From Model Realism to Purpose of the Model,"
Computational and Mathematical Organization Theory, 1, 57-71.
Carley, K. (1991), "A Theory of Group Stability." American Sociological Review , 56,
331-354.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. and M. W. Feldman (1981). Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A
Quantitative Approach. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Cohen, M. D., J. G. March and J. P. Olsen (1972), "A Garbage Can Model of
Organizational Choice." Administrative Science Quarterly, 17, 1-25.
Cyert, R. M., and J. G. March (1963), A Behavioral Theory of the Firm. Prentice-Hall:
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Dutton, J.M. and W.H. Starbuck (1971), Computer Simulation of Human Behavior.
Wiley: New York.
Efron, B. and R. J. Tibshirani (1993), An Introduction to the Bootstrap. Chapman and
Hall: New York.
Epstein, J. M, and R. Axtell (forthcoming 1995), Growing Artificial Societies: Social
Science From the Bottom Up. The Brookings Institution: Washington, D.C.

- 24 -

Friedkin, N. E. and E. C. Johnson. 1990. "Social Influence and Opinions." Journal of
Mathematical Sociology, 15, 193-205.
Harrison, J. R. and G. R. Carroll (1991). "Keeping the Faith: A Model of Cultural
Transmission in Formal Organizations." Administrative Science Quarterly, 36,
552-582.
Hoel, P.G. (1962.), Introduction to Mathematical Statistics. Third ed. Wiley: New York.
Knepell, P.L. (1993), Simulation Validation, A Confidence Assessment Methodology.
IEEE Computer Society Press: Los Alamitos, CA.
Kramer, E. E. (1970), The Nature and Growth of Modern Mathematics, 2. Fawcett,
Greenwich, Connecticut.
Lane, D. (1993), "Artificial Worlds and Economics, Parts 1 and 2.'' Journal of
Evolutionary Economics, 3, 89-107 and 177-197.
Latour, B. and S. Woolgar (1979), Laboratory Life : the Social Construction of Scientific
Facts. Sage Publications: Beverly Hills.
March, J. G. 1991. "Exploration and Exploitation in Organizational Learning."
Organization Science, 2, 71-87.
Nowak, A. J. Szamrej and B. Latane (1990). "From Private Attitude to Public Opinion:
A Dynamic Theory of Social Impact." Psychological Review, 97, 362-376.
Renfrew, C. (ed.). (1973), The Explanation of Social influence: Models in Prehistory.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Sabloff, J.A. (ed.). (1981). Simulations in Archeology. Albuquerque: University of New
Mexico Press.
Siegel, S. (1956), Nonparametric Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences. McGraw-Hill:
New York.
Wuensche, A. and M. J. Lesser (1992). The Global Dynamics of Cellular Automata: An
Atlas of Basin of Attraction Fields of One-Dimensional Cellular Automata.
Addison-Wesley: Reading, MA.

- 25 -

Appendix 1. Axelrod's Work Log

A1.1 Design of the Replication Study
1. Discussion with Cohen about the general idea of the replication experiment,
including the suitability of my cultural model and Sugarscape for this purpose.
(hours:minutes. 3:00)
2. Writing letter to Axtell and Epstein specifying what we came to call the docking
experiment, including the choice of data points to be compared. (Cohen had already
discussed the idea with them in Vienna.) (1:00)
3. Trip arrangements for Axtell and Epstein (1:00)
4. Discussion among all four of us of the docking experiment and its motivation,
especially the importance of doing what we came to call distributional equivalence, rather
relational equivalence (1.00).
5. Discussion among all four of us about the details of Axelrod's cultural model.
This included discussion about the sentence that said "the chance of interaction is
proportional to the cultural similarity two neighbors already have" where cultural
similarity is the proportion of attributes which have the same value. Axtell had
implemented this literally, but I pointed out that I actually used a more efficient (and
equivalent) method, namely to allow interaction if a single randomly chosen attribute has
the same value. (1:00)
6. Preliminary specification of what became the mobility experiment. See Section
4.3.1. (2:00).
Subtotal: 9:00

A1. 2 Data Analysis

- 26 -

1. Extraction of key raw data from my old computer output for Axtell to use in
comparing my data to his. (1:00)
2. Communications with Axtell about receiving his data, and updating it after he
corrected for changing the agent rather than the neighbor. See Section 5.1. (2:30)
3. Discussions with Cohen and a statistical consultant, Pat Guire, on proper
statistical testing (3:00)
4. Putting Axtell's data in a format comparable to mine, and calculating basic
statistics (2:00)
5. Consideration of alternative possible reasons why the original attempt at
docking did not succeed for the 20x20 case. Development of tests of these possibilities
(e.g. a bug in my code or Axtell's code), and identification of the likely cause as differences
in the activation methods See Section 4.2. (5:30).
Subtotal: 14:00

Grand Total: 23:00

- 27 -

Appendix 2. Axtell's Work Log

A 2.1 Code changes accomplished in Ann Arbor:
1. Generalize culture representation from type BOOLEAN
to an enumerated type (Hours: Minutes, 0:10)
2. Change agent initialization:
A. Fill lattice densely with agents (0:20)
B. Give agents random initial cultures (0:20)
3. Implement a version of Axelrod's culture rule (01:00)
4. Draw boundaries between agents not culturally identical (0:30)
5. New stopping criterion (0:15)
6. Count distinct cultures (surrogate for counting regions) (0:15)
7. Switch landscape from torus to square negligible (<0:01)
8. Turn-off all other Sugarscape rules negligible (<0:01)
9. Debugging all of above (1:00)
Sub-total: 3:50

A 2.2 Subsequent code modifications:
1. Modify neighborhood representation so that agents on the border of the lattice
do not attempt to interact with non-existent (NIL) neighbors (0:30)
2. Represent regions as social networks and then use
'clique_size' of social network object to count regions
(this obviated the need for #6 above) (0:30)
3. File output of number of cultural regions (0:10)
Sub-total: 1:10

A 2.3 Running the model:
- 28 -

1. Make executable files for various parameter settings (0:40)
2. 90 runs for comparison to Axelrod's ata on features and values/feature. See
Table 1. (2:00)
3. 120 runs for comparison to Axelrod's data on lattice size. See Figure 1. (8:00)
Sub-total: 10:40

A 2.4 Statistical comparison:
1. .Development of Mann-Whitney U test in Mathematica (2:00)
2. Analysis of data using the Mann-Whitney U test (1:00)
3. Development of Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) analysis
routines in Mathematica (4:00)
4. Analysis of data using K-S test (2:00)
Sub-total: 9:00

A 2.5 Mobility experiment: See Section 4.3.1
1. Modify the stopping criteria to consider agent interactions
with the entire population (0:10)
2. Time series plot for the distinct number of cultures (1:00)
3. Instantiate a standard version of the Sugarscape with the Epstein-Axtell culture
rule replace by Axelrod's (0:10)
4. Make executable file (0:05)
5. Perform multiple runs of this model (1:00)
Sub-total: 2:25

A 2.6 'Pure soup' experiment: See Section 4.3.2
1. Instantiate soup version of the Sugarscape with Axelrod's culture rule (0:10)
2. Make executable file (0:05)

- 29 -

3. Perform multiple realizations of this model (1:00)
Sub-total: 1:15

A 2.7 Re-docking: See Section 4.2
1. Change agent activation from sequential to random (0:10)
2. Re-run the model (40 runs) (8:00)
3. Analysis of new data (0:20)
Sub-total: 8:30

Grand total: 36:50

- 30 -

_________________________________________________________________________
Table 1
Average Number of Stable Regions
_________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________
a. Axelrod's Cultural Model

Features

Values/Feature

5
10
15

5
1.0
1.0
1.0

b. Sugarscape Implementation

Features

10
3.2 ± 1.8
1.0
1.0

15
20.0 ± 10.1
1.4 ± 0.5
1.2 ± 0.4

Values/Feature

5
10
15

5
1.0
1.0
1.0

10
5.3 ± 3.9
1.0
1.0

15
21.3 ± 12.6
1.5 ± 0.7
1.0

________________________________________________________________________
Note: Each cell is based on ten replications. Standard deviations are shown when they are
not equal to zero. All data are for territories of 10x10 sites.
_______________________________________________________________________

- 31 -

Figure 1
Average Number of Stable Regions
in Axelrod's Cultural Model and Sugarscape Implementation

Legend:
Solid squares represent the target ACM data for 5 cultural features and 15 traits per
feature. Each territory size was replicated 40 times, except the territories with
50x50 sites and 100x100 sites which were replicated 10 times.
Open squares represent the Sugarscape data for the same number of features and traits
per feature. Each territorial size (5x5, 10x10 and 20x20) was replicated 10 times.
Open diamonds represent Sugarscape means plus and minus a standard deviation.

- 32 -

