Pattern-Oriented Modeling of Agent-Based Complex
Systems: Lessons from Ecology
Volker Grimm, et al.
Science 310, 987 (2005);
DOI: 10.1126/science.1116681
The following resources related to this article are available online at
www.sciencemag.org (this information is current as of April 21, 2008 ):

Supporting Online Material can be found at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/310/5750/987/DC1
This article cites 23 articles, 5 of which can be accessed for free:
http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/310/5750/987#otherarticles
This article has been cited by 47 article(s) on the ISI Web of Science.
This article has been cited by 4 articles hosted by HighWire Press; see:
http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/310/5750/987#otherarticles
This article appears in the following subject collections:
Ecology
http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/collection/ecology
Information about obtaining reprints of this article or about obtaining permission to reproduce
this article in whole or in part can be found at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/about/permissions.dtl

Science (print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published weekly, except the last week in December, by the
American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. Copyright
2005 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science; all rights reserved. The title Science is a
registered trademark of AAAS.

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on April 21, 2008

Updated information and services, including high-resolution figures, can be found in the online
version of this article at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/310/5750/987

REVIEW
Pattern-Oriented Modeling of Agent-Based
Complex Systems: Lessons from Ecology
Agent-based complex systems are dynamic networks of many interacting agents; examples
include ecosystems, financial markets, and cities. The search for general principles
underlying the internal organization of such systems often uses bottom-up simulation
models such as cellular automata and agent-based models. No general framework for
designing, testing, and analyzing bottom-up models has yet been established, but recent
advances in ecological modeling have come together in a general strategy we call patternoriented modeling. This strategy provides a unifying framework for decoding the internal
organization of agent-based complex systems and may lead toward unifying algorithmic
theories of the relation between adaptive behavior and system complexity.

W

hat makes James Bond an agent?
He has a clear goal, he is autonomous in his decisions about
achieving the goal, and he adapts these decisions to his rapidly changing situation. We
are surrounded by such autonomous, adaptive
agents: cells of the immune system, plants, citizens, stock market investors, businesses, etc.
The agent-based complex systems (1) (ACSs)
around us are made up of myriad interacting
agents. One of the most important challenges
confronting modern science is to understand
and predict such systems. Bottom-up simulation modeling is one tool for doing so: We
compile relevant information about entities at
a lower level of the system (in Bagent-based
models,[ these are individual agents), formulate theories about their behavior, implement
these theories in a computer simulation, and
observe the emergence of system-level properties related to particular questions (2, 3).
1
UFZ Umweltforschungszentrum Leipzig-Halle, Department Ökologische Systemanalyse, PF 500 136,
04301 Leipzig, Germany. 2Department of Applied Biology, Estación Biológica de Doñana, Spanish Council for
Scientific Research CSIC, Ave. Maria Luisa s/n, E-41013
Seville, Spain. 3Zentrum für Marine Tropenökologie,
Fahrenheitstrasse 6, 28359 Bremen, Germany. 4Institut für Biochemie und Biologie, Universität Potsdam,
Maulbeerallee 2, 14469 Potsdam, Germany. 5Netherlands Institute of Ecology, Centre for Limnology,
Rijksstraatweg 6, 3631 AC Nieuwersluis, Netherlands.
6
Lang, Railsback and Associates and Department of
Mathematics, Humboldt State University, 250 California Avenue, Arcata, CA 95521, USA. 7Botany Section,
Department of Ecology, Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University Rolighedsvej 21, DK-1958 Frederiksberg,
Denmark. 8U.S. Geological Survey/Florida Integrated
Science Centers and Department of Biology, University of Miami, Post Office Box 249118, Coral Gables,
FL 33124, USA.

*To whom correspondence should be addressed.
E-mail: volker.grimm@ufz.de

Bottom-up models have been developed
for many types of ACSs (4), but the identification of general principles underlying the
organization of ACSs has been hampered by
the lack of an explicit strategy for coping
with the two main challenges of bottom-up
modeling: complexity and uncertainty (5, 6).
Consequently, model structure often is chosen
ad hoc, and the focus is often on how to
represent agents without sufficient emphasis
on analyzing and validating the applicability of
models to real problems (5, 7).
A strategy called pattern-oriented modeling
(POM) attempts to make bottom-up modeling
more rigorous and comprehensive (6, 8–10). In
POM, we explicitly follow the basic research
program of science: the explanation of observed patterns (11). Patterns are defining characteristics of a system and often, therefore,
indicators of essential underlying processes
and structures. Patterns contain information on
the internal organization of a system, but in a
Bcoded[ form. The purpose of POM is to
Bdecode[ this information (10).
The motivation for POM is that, for complex systems, a single pattern observed at a
specific scale and hierarchical level is not
sufficient to reduce uncertainty in model structure and parameters. This has long been known
in science. For example, Chargaff_s rule of
DNA base pairing was not sufficient to decode the structure of DNA—until combined
with patterns from x-ray diffraction of DNA
and from the tautomeric properties of the purine and pyrimidine bases (12). Thus, in POM,
multiple patterns observed in real systems at
different hierarchical levels and scales are used
systematically to optimize model complexity
and to reduce uncertainty.
POM was formulated in ecology, a science
with a long tradition of bottom-up modeling.

www.sciencemag.org

SCIENCE VOL 310

Ecology, in the past 30 years, has produced as
many individual-based models as all other disciplines together have produced agent-based
models (13), and has focused more on bottomup models that address real systems and problems (14).
We describe here how observed patterns
can be used to optimize model structure, test
and contrast theories for agent behavior, and
reduce parameter uncertainty. Finally, we
discuss POM as a unifying framework for the
science of agent-based complex systems in
general.

Patterns for Model Structure:
The Medawar Zone
Finding the optimal level of resolution in a
bottom-up model’s structure is a fundamental
problem. If a model is too simple, it neglects
essential mechanisms of the real system,
limiting its potential to provide understanding
and testable predictions regarding the problem
it addresses. If a model is too complex, its
analysis will be cumbersome and likely to get
bogged down in detail. We need a way to find
an optimal zone of model complexity, the
‘‘Medawar zone’’ (Fig. 1).
Modeling has to start with specific questions (15). From these questions, we first
formulate a conceptual model that helps us
decide which elements and processes of the
real system to include or ignore. With complex
systems, however, the question addressed by
the model is not sufficient to locate the
Medawar zone because ACSs include too
many degrees of freedom. Moreover, the conceptual model may too much reflect our perspective as external observers, with our specific
interests, beliefs, and scales of perception.
A key idea of POM is to use multiple
patterns observed in real systems to guide
design of model structure. Using observed
patterns for model design directly ties the
model’s structure to the internal organization
of the real system. We do so by asking: What
observed patterns seem to characterize the
system and its dynamics, and what variables
and processes must be in the model so that
these patterns could, in principle, emerge? For
example, if there are patterns in age structure,
sex ratio, and spatial distribution, then age,
sex, and space should be represented in the

11 NOVEMBER 2005

987

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on April 21, 2008

Volker Grimm,1* Eloy Revilla,2 Uta Berger,3 Florian Jeltsch,4 Wolf M. Mooij,5 Steven F. Railsback,6
Hans-Hermann Thulke,1 Jacob Weiner,7 Thorsten Wiegand,1 Donald L. DeAngelis8

REVIEW

988

Patterns for Contrasting
Alternative Theories
Agents continuously make decisions to reach
their goals—e.g., survival and reproductive
success, profiting in a stock market, finding
the best place to settle—in an ever-changing
environment. How do we model these decisions? What information do agents have, what
alternatives do they consider, and how do they
predict the consequences of their decisions?
Many studies of ACSs try only one model of
decision-making and attempt to show that it
leads to results compatible with a limited data
set. This practice, however, may lead to the
impression that bottom-up models include so
many parameters that they can be fitted to data
whether or not their structure and processes are
valid.
A more rigorous strategy for modeling
agent decisions, or other bottom-up processes,
is to use ‘‘strong inference’’ (25) by contrasting alternative decision models, or ‘‘theories’’
(3, 6). First, alternative theories of the agent’s
decisions are formulated. Next, characteristic
patterns at both the individual and higher
levels are identified. The alternative theories

11 NOVEMBER 2005 VOL 310

SCIENCE

Medawar zone

Model complexity

Problem

Multiple
Patterns

Data

Fig. 1. Payoff of bottom-up models versus their
complexity. A model’s payoff is determined not
only by how useful it is for the problem it was
developed for, but also by its structural realism;
i.e., its ability to produce independent predictions
that match observations. If model design is guided
only by the problem to be addressed (which often
is the explanation of a single pattern), the model
will be too simple. If model design is driven by all
the data available, the model will be too complex.
But there is a zone of intermediate complexity
where the payoff is high. We call this the
‘‘Medawar zone’’ because Medawar described a
similar relation between the difficulty of a
scientific problem and its payoff (41). If the very
process of model development is guided by
multiple patterns observed at different scales
and hierarchical levels, the model is likely to end
up in the Medawar zone.

are then implemented in a bottom-up model
and tested by how well they reproduce the
patterns. Decision models that fail to reproduce
the characteristic patterns are rejected, and
additional patterns with more falsifying power
can be used to contrast successful alternatives.
Rigorous techniques can be used to design
experiments and analyze data (6, 26).
As an example, consider the well-known
‘‘boids’’ model (27) that produces schoolinglike behavior from a simple theory: Individual
boids try to avoid collisions, match the velocity
of neighboring individuals, and stay close to
neighbors. The emergence of aggregations
resembling fish schools from this theory (Fig.
3), however, does not prove that boids explains
schooling in real fish.
To define theory for schooling of real fish,
Huth (28) used observed patterns and contrasted alternative theories for fish behavior.
Two patterns characterizing fish schools were
defined and quantified: polarization and nearest neighbor distance (Fig. 3). Eleven alternative theories for how fish adapt swimming
speed and direction were formulated. In the
first nine theories, the influence of neighbors is
averaged; but in two theories, fish adjust their
swimming to only one neighbor—e.g., the one

www.sciencemag.org

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on April 21, 2008

increase model credibility, gain understanding
(18), and address more questions.
In an example from ecological epidemiology, multiple patterns guided the stepwise
design and calibration of a model describing
the spread of rabies among red foxes in central
Europe (22). Observed patterns included the
large-scale wave of rabies prevalence, disease
pockets ahead of the wave, and temporal oscillations of prevalence at local and regional
scales. The resulting model reproduced these
patterns, but not by simply applying a preconceived model structure and then fitting it to
the patterns; instead, one pattern after another
was used to gradually refine model structure
(23). Structural realism of this model is
indicated by the striking match between model
predictions and a long-term data set of hunted
foxes, which combines aspects of rabies epidemiology (before the onset of rabies control),
fox ecology (after control), and their interaction (during control).
In other ACS disciplines, we found only a
few models explicitly addressing multiple patterns, although many models were implicitly based on multiple patterns. A model of
consumer markets (24) addresses three patterns: (i) The statistical distribution of weekly sales of fast-moving consumer goods has
fatter tails and thinner peaks than normal distributions; (ii) there are clusters of high sales
volatility; and (iii) market shares of different
stores follow power-law distributions. Exactly
how these patterns influenced the design of
the model is not clear, but pattern (iii) appears to be why the model is spatially explicit:
Consumer agents only visit stores that are
nearby.

Payoff

model; if we know that agents behave differently at high densities (e.g., are more aggressive), behavior variability should be in the
model. This use of patterns might force us to
include state variables and processes that are
only indirectly linked to the ultimate purpose
of the model and are not part of our initial
conceptual model. Ideally, the patterns used to
design a model occur at different spatial and
temporal scales and different hierarchical levels, because the key to understanding complex
systems often lies in understanding how processes on different scales and hierarchical levels
are bound to each other.
Multiple patterns were key to modeling
spatiotemporal dynamics of the beech forests
of central Europe (Fig. 2). Natural beech forests
are characterized by a spatial mosaic pattern of
successional stages. A cellular automaton model that focused on this pattern only (16) was too
poor in structure to reveal the forest’s internal organization. But the forests have more
characteristic patterns. Different successional
stages have different patterns of vertical structure: e.g., the climax stage has closed canopy
and little understory, and the decaying stage
has canopy gaps and an understory of young
beech. Therefore, a newer model (17, 18) includes four height classes (from seedlings to
upper canopy) (Fig. 2). The model also explicitly represents individual big trees because
canopy gaps are caused by windthrow, an
individual-level process. The model’s structure was thus determined by the multiple
characteristic patterns: The mosaic pattern
determined horizontal spatial scale and resolution, the vertical patterns determined the
need for height classes, and canopy gaps determined that large beeches must be described
individually.
When designed to reproduce multiple patterns, models are more likely to be ‘‘structurally
realistic’’ (10). In particular, model components (e.g., individuals) correspond directly to
observed objects and variables, and processes
correspond to the internal organization of the
real system, so that the model ‘‘not only reproduces the observed real system behavior,
but truly reflects the way in which the real
system operates to produce this behavior’’
[(19), p. 5].
Structurally realistic models can make independent and testable secondary predictions.
The beech forest model, for example, delivered
independent predictions of forest characteristics that were not considered during model
development and testing (20). Predictions of
age structure in the canopy and the spatial
distribution of very old ‘‘giant’’ trees were in
good agreement with observations, considerably increasing the model’s credibility and
justifying a completely new application: tracking woody debris (21). Complexity in patternoriented bottom-up models is not simply a
burden but can provide rich opportunities to

none of the simulations reproduced all
the observed market
patterns, the assumption that all investors
use 25-year memories
failed to reproduce
the most basic pattern: price volatility.
This pattern-oriented
analysis indicates
that individual variation in investment
decision-making is
crucial to stock market dynamics.
Testing and contrasting alternative
theories or decision
models has several
benefits. We are
forced to be explicit
about how decision
models are formuFig. 2. Pattern-oriented model design. Observed patterns that characterize old-growth beech forests [(A); images: front, M. lated and tested; we
Flade; right, C. Rademacher; top, S. Winter] include a horizontal mosaic of developmental stages [(B); x scale: 400 m; modified can demonstrate how
from (42)], the vertical patterns of tree size that define the developmental stages [(C), showing the late decaying stage; important the spex scale: È60 m; modified from (43)], and distributions of fallen large trees [(D), a map of fallen wood; ellipses indicate crown cific formulation of
projections of standing trees; x scale: È60 m; modified from (43)]. To allow these patterns to emerge from it, the model
includes a grid-based horizontal structure [(E), showing grid cells in three developmental stages; x scale: 570 m], a grid-based a decision—or any
vertical structure [(F), showing each grid cell’s percentage cover for four height classes; total area shown: 1 ha)], and other low-level—
individual representation of large trees [(G), showing one cell’s trees in the largest two height classes; cell area: 204 m2); (E) model is; we can exto (G) modified from (18)].
plore null models;
and we can continually refine models by applying additional
together they were able to falsify all but one
closest in front. These two ‘‘priority’’ theories
patterns.
theory of habitat selection.
failed to reproduce realistic polarization values
In a model exploring what determines the
(Fig. 3), eliminating them as valid theory.
Patterns for Parameters:
access of nomadic herdsmen to pasture lands
This example shows that looking at one
Coping with Uncertainty
owned by village farmers in north Cameroon,
pattern may not be sufficient to falsify weak
herdsmen negotiate with farmers for access to
theory: Looking at nearest neighbor distance
Pattern-oriented modeling can reduce uncerpastures (29). Two theories of the herdsmen’s
alone suggested that both types of schooling
tainty in model parameters in two ways. First,
reasoning were contrasted: (i) ‘‘cost priority,’’
model produce similar results, but in fact the
it helps make models structurally realistic,
in which herdsmen only consider one dimenpriority theories produce schools only as comwhich usually makes them less sensitive to
sion of their relationship to farmers—costs;
pact, but not as polarized, as real schools.
parameter uncertainty (31). For example, an
and (ii) ‘‘friend priority,’’ in which herdsmen
Moreover, the nine theories based on averaging
individual-based coyote population model
remember the number of agreements and
differ widely in assumptions, but the fish school’s
reproduced an array of observed patterns with
refusals they received in previous negotiations.
properties turned out to be robust to these
no fine-tuning of parameter values taken from
Real herdsmen sustain a social network across
assumptions. Demonstrating robustness is also
the literature (32). The trout model (9) had
many villages through repeated interactions,
key to a bottom-up model’s credibility, because it
four parameters that were particularly una pattern reproduced only by the ‘‘friend
indicates that we captured the most important
certain yet important; each had relatively
priority’’ theory.
mechanisms. Huth and Wissel’s model also
independent effects on four different outputs
In economics, agent-based model experireproduced several additional patterns not
(size versus abundance, for juveniles versus
ments have been used to identify characterconsidered during model development, providadults), so they could be calibrated manually
istics of artificial stock market investors that
ing further support for its structural realism.
and independently.
reproduce patterns well known from real stock
This pattern-oriented theory development
Second, the realism of structure and mechmarkets (30). These patterns include continual
approach is increasingly used in models of
anism of pattern-oriented models helps paramand unpredictable stock price volatility, high
ACS. Railsback and Harvey (9) used a stream
eters interact in ways similar to interactions
skew and kurtosis in the distribution of profits
trout model to contrast three theories for how
of real mechanisms. It is therefore possible
among investors, and an inverse relation beindividual fish select habitat. Only a new
to fit all calibration parameters by finding
tween current investment profits and future
theory that assumes that fish select habitat to
values that reproduce multiple patterns simulprice instability. Two assumptions were
maximize expected survival over a future
taneously. This technique is known as ‘‘incontrasted about how much historic data
period reproduced observed patterns of feeding
verse modeling’’ (33). For a spatially explicit
investors use to predict the outcome of their
hierarchy, response to competing species and
individual-based model of brown bear disinvestment decisions: (i) Investors all use 25predatory fish, seasonal habitat shifts, and
persal from Slovenia into the Alps (34), a
year memories of market data, versus (ii)
response to reduced food availability. Although
global sensitivity analysis of the uncalibrated
memory varies from 0.5 to 25 years. Although
these patterns are each qualitative, or ‘‘weak,’’
parameter set revealed high uncertainty in
www.sciencemag.org

SCIENCE VOL 310

11 NOVEMBER 2005

989

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on April 21, 2008

REVIEW

REVIEW

990

11 NOVEMBER 2005 VOL 310

SCIENCE

www.sciencemag.org

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on April 21, 2008

Polarization

Nearest neighbor
distance

model output. To reA
B 1.5
duce this uncertainty,
two data sets were
1.0
used to identify five
patterns. Quantitative criteria for the
0.5
agreement between
observed and sim0.0
ulated patterns were
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
developed. The in60
direct modeling analysis started with 557
50
random parameter
40
sets covering the plausible ranges of all pa30
rameters. The five
20
observed patterns
were used as filters:
10
Only 10 of the 557
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
parameter sets reModel version
produced all of them.
Fig.
3.
Strong
inference
by
contrasting
alternative
theories
of
the
agents’
behavior.
Boids
(27)
is
a conceptual model that
This parameter fildemonstrates how schools or flocks can emerge from simple rules for behavior [(A); a version of boids by H. Hildenbrandt (44)]. (B)
tering reduced the In a similar model of fish schools (28, 45), 11 alternative theories of fish behavior were contrasted by looking at two school-level
model’s global sen- patterns: polarization (p) and nearest neighbor distance (NND); p is 0- if all fish swim in the same direction and p approaches 90sitivity by a factor if all fish swim in random directions. Values of p observed in real fish schools are 10- to 20-; observed NND is often G1 fish body
length. In model versions 1 to 9, the influence of neighbor fish is averaged; in model version 10 and 11 (shaded), fish select a single
of 4 (fig. S1).
Indirect parame- neighbor fish and orient their swimming to this neighbor only.
terization is routine
in physical process models (i.e., in chemistry,
hydrology, and climate modeling), but rare
so far in models of ACSs. An encouraging
exception is the agent-based model of an
ancient society, the Kayenta Anasazi, who
occupied the Long House Valley in northeastern Arizona (United States) until 1300
A.D. Paleoenvironmental and archaeological
records permitted the development of a detailed, spatially explicit agent-based model of
this society and its history (35). These data
include estimates of annual potential maize
production for each hectare in the study area
for the period 400 to 1400 A.D. and records of
human settlement in the valley. Theories for
agent decisions, for example, splitting households and moving, were based on detailed regional ethnographies.
The model includes variability in mortality,
fertility, splitting of households, and maize
harvest rates; with eight unknown parameters.
To evaluate these parameters indirectly, the
time series of the number of simulated households was compared to the historical record.
The best parameter set reproduced all imFig. 4. Parameterization and independent predictions of an agent-based model of the Anasazi in
portant trends and population sizes in the arthe Long House Valley [modified from (35)]. The simulation environment consists of an 80 by 120
chaeological record. This parameter set also
grid of 1-ha squares. Dark gray represents a higher water table; light gray and blue represent a
lower water table. White is nonfarmable land. The red dots represent settlements. (Left) The
reproduced important features of the spatial
historical settlement in 1125 A.D.; (right) prediction of the simulation model for the same year.
distribution of the settlements (Fig. 4) and the
The match between data and simulation is imperfect, but the clustering of settlements along the
gradual northward movement of the populavalley boundaries is captured by the model. The model was calibrated not to the settlement
tion. These spatial patterns can be considered
patterns but to the population size time series for 400 to 1450 A.D.
independent predictions, strong indicators of
the model’s structural realism.
agents’’ (36); see also table S1]. However,
entities are physical objects such as atoms
Implications and Future Directions
POM is the first attempt to explicitly formulate
and stars, or are relatively easy to represent,
Patterns are widely used by many modelers,
a rigorous and comprehensive strategy for
such as flocking birds, pedestrians in a
particularly in disciplines where the low-level
modeling ACSs. The POM strategy is a
panicking crowd, or car drivers [‘‘Brownian

way to focus on the most essential information about a complex system’s internal organization. Multiple patterns keep us from
building models that are too simple in structure and mechanism, or too complex and
uncertain. Using patterns to test and contrast
alternative theories for agent behavior or
other low-level processes is a way for the
science of ACS to get beyond clever demonstration models and on to rigorous explanations of how real systems are organized and
how they respond to internal and external
forces. POM is just taking root, and we expect to see its rapid development in the near
future.
Bottom-up models are virtual laboratories
where controlled experiments distinguish
noise from signal in the system’s organization. In particular, experiments contrasting
hypotheses for the behavior of interacting
agents will lead to an accumulation of theory
for how the dynamics of systems from molecules to ecosystems and economies emerge
from bottom-level processes. This approach
may change our whole notion of scientific
theory, which until now has been based on
the theories of physics. Theories of complex
systems may never be reducible to simple
analytical equations, but are more likely to
be sets of conceptually simple mechanisms
(e.g., Darwinian natural selection) that produce different dynamics and outcomes in
different contexts. POM thus may lead us to
an algorithmic (37), rather than analytical,
approach to theory.
References and Notes
1. ‘‘Agent-based complex systems’’ (ACSs) are often
referred to as ‘‘complex adaptive systems,’’ but we
prefer ACS because it is not clear whether systems
are really adaptive, which would require that they
have a goal.
2. J. Epstein, R. Axtell, Growing Artificial Societies. Social
Science from the Bottom Up (Brookings Institution/
MIT Press, Washington, DC, 1996).
3. S. Y. Auyang, Foundations of Complex System
Theories in Economics, Evolutionary Biology, and
Statistical Physics (Cambridge Univ. Press, New York,
1998).

4. See the list of recent reviews of bottom-up models
provided in the Supporting Online Material.
5. S. C. Bankes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 7199
(2002).
6. V. Grimm, S. F. Railsback, Individual-Based Modeling and
Ecology (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ, 2005).
7. R. Lempert, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 7195
(2002).
8. V. Grimm et al., Sci. Total Environ. 183, 151 (1996).
9. S. F. Railsback, B. C. Harvey, Ecology 83, 1817 (2002).
10. T. Wiegand, F. Jeltsch, I. Hanski, V. Grimm, Oikos
100, 209 (2003).
11. Patterns are observations of any kind showing
nonrandom structure and therefore containing information on the mechanisms from which they
emerge. Complex systems contain patterns at different hierarchical levels and scales. Ecosystems, for
example, contain patterns in primary production,
species diversity, spatial structure, dynamics of component species populations, behavior of individual
organisms, resource dynamics, and response of all
these to disturbance events and stress. Useful patterns need not be striking; qualitative or ‘‘weak’’ patterns can be powerful in combination. For example,
we can easily identify a person in a crowd even without a strong pattern (e.g., a photograph) by using a
set of weak patterns: sex, approximate age, hair color, size, etc. Each of these characteristic patterns
excludes many individuals.
12. J. Watson, The Double Helix: A Personal Account of
the Discovery of the Structure of DNA (Atheneum,
New York, 1968).
13. A search for ‘‘(individual-based or individualoriented) and model*’’ and for ‘‘(agent-based or
agent-oriented) and model*’’ in the Web of Science
database (title, abstract, keywords) yielded 1023
‘‘individual-based’’ records and 1036 ‘‘agent-based’’
records. A review of the 1023 individual-based
records indicates that more than 90% of them are
ecological (38).
14. Examples include individual-based models for forest
management (39) and population viability analysis
(40); see also the POM references and the ecological
bottom-up reviews in the Supporting Online Material.
15. C. Wissel, Theoretische Ökologie—Eine Einführung
(Springer, Berlin, 1989).
16. C. Wissel, Ecol. Model. 63, 29 (1992).
17. C. Neuert, C. Rademacher, V. Grundmann, C. Wissel,
V. Grimm, Natursch. Landschaftspl. 33, 173 (2001).
18. C. Rademacher, C. Neuert, V. Grundmann, C. Wissel,
V. Grimm, For. Ecol. Manage. 194, 349 (2004).
19. B. P. Zeigler, Theory of Modeling and Simulation
(Krieger, Malabar, FL, 1985; first published in 1976 by
Wiley, New York).
20. C. Rademacher, C. Neuert, V. Grundmann, C. Wissel,
V. Grimm, Forstwissenschaftliches Centralblatt 120,
288 (2001).
21. C. Rademacher, S. Winter, Forstwiss. Centralbl. 122,
337 (2003).
22. F. Jeltsch, M. S. Müller, V. Grimm, C. Wissel, R. Brandl,
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 264, 495 (1997).

www.sciencemag.org

SCIENCE VOL 310

23. H. H. Thulke et al., Ecol. Model. 117, 179 (1999).
24. S. Moss, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 7267
(2002).
25. J. R. Platt, Science 146, 347 (1964).
26. S. L. Peck, Trends Ecol. Evol. 19, 530 (2004).
27. C. W. Reynolds, Comput. Graph. (ACM) 21, 25
(1987).
28. A. Huth, thesis, University of Marburg, Germany
(1992).
29. J. Rouchier, F. Bousquet, M. Requier-Desjardins, M.
Antona, J. Econ. Dyn. Control 25, 527 (2001).
30. B. LeBaron, IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. 5, 442 (2001).
31. W. M. Mooij, D. L. DeAngelis, Ecol. Appl. 13, 794
(2003).
32. W. C. Pitt, P. W. Box, F. F. Knowlton, Ecol. Model.
166, 109 (2003).
33. K. P. Burnham, D. R. Anderson, Model Selection and
Inference, a Practical Information-Theoretic Approach
(Springer, New York, 2002).
34. T. Wiegand, E. Revilla, F. Knauer, Biodivers. Conserv.
13, 53 (2004).
35. R. L. Axtell et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99,
7275 (2002).
36. F. Schweitzer, Brownian Agents and Active Particles:
Collective Dynamics in the Natural and Social Sciences
(Springer, Berlin, 2003).
37. D. C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution
and the Meanings of Life (Simon & Schuster, New
York, 1995).
38. D. L. DeAngelis, W. M. Mooij, Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol.
Syst., in press.
39. J. Liu, P. S. Ashton, For. Ecol. Manage. 73, 157 (1995).
40. M. Burgman, H. Possingham, in Genetics, Demography and Viability of Fragmented Populations, A. G.
Young, G. M. Clarke, Eds. (Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge, 2000), pp. 97–112.
41. C. Loehle, Bioscience 40, 123 (1990).
42. H. Remmert, in The Mosaic-Cycle Concept of Ecosystems,
H. Remmert, Ed. (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York,
1991).
43. S. Korpel’, Die Urwälder der Westkarpaten (Gustav
Fischer Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New York, 1995).
44. See www.rug.nl/biologie/onderzoek/onderzoekgroepen/
theoreticalbiology/peoplePages/hannoPage.
45. A. Huth, C. Wissel, Ecol. Model. 75–76, 135 (1994).
46. We thank L. Tesfatsion, P. Johnson, B. LeBaron, and
T. Kohler for hints to relevant literature; S. Winter,
M. Flade, and C. Rademacher for providing photos;
H. Hildenbrandt for Fig. 3A; and three anonymous
referees for valuable comments.
Supporting Online Material
www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/310/5750/987/
DC1
SOM Text
Fig. S1
Table S1
References and Notes
10.1126/science.1116681

11 NOVEMBER 2005

991

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on April 21, 2008

REVIEW

